# **Networking Devices**
> _Compare and contrast networking appliances, applications, and functions._

## Physical & Virtual Appliances
- Physical appliances are dedicated hardware devices focused on specific network functions, offering high performance and reliability but at a higher cost and with space requirements.
- Virtual appliances are software-based solutions that run on virtual machines, providing similar functionalities with greater flexibility, scalability, and cost efficiency, but potentially at the expense of raw performance.
### Router
- OSI layer 3 device (Network)
- Directs data packets between different networks based on IP addresses.
_ Use routing tables to determine best path for packet forwarding.
- Routers inside of switches sometimes called "Layer 3 switches"
    - Layer 2 = Switch
    - Layer 3 = Router
- Routes traffic between IP subnets
    - May be withing a data center of other parts of the world
- Often connects diverse network types
    - LAN to WAN, etc.
    - Copper to fiber, etc.
### Switch
- Bridging done in hardware by MAC address
    - Application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC)
        - Hardware inside devices
- Functions in OSI layer 2
    - Forwards traffic based on data link address (MAC)
- Many ports and features for different functions and capabilities
    - Core of enterprise network
    - May provide PoE
- Multilayer switch 
    - Includes routing (layer 3) function
### Firewall
- Traditional firewalls filter traffic by port number or application
- Modern Next Generation Firewall (NGFW) identify applications traversing network and mange (allow/deny)
- May be able to encrypt traffic
    - VPN
- Most firewalls can be layer 3 devices
    - Sit at ingress/egress of network
    - Manages traffic between inside and outside of network
- Network Address Translation (NAT)
- Dynamic Routing 
### Intrusion Detection System (IDS)/Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)
- Devices that monitors network and/or system activities for malicious activities or policy violations.
- Intrusion Detections System (IDS)
    - Passively monitors and alerts system administrators of suspicious activity or inbound attacks
- Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)
    - Actively blocks or prevents activities based on detected anomalies, signatures, and policies to protect network from threats.
    - Stops attack before it gets inside the network.
- Intrusions
    - Usually known attack types
    - Exploits against operating systems, applications, etc.
    - Buffer overflows, cross-site scripting, other vulnerabilities.
### Load Balancer
- Distributes incoming network traffic across multiple servers to ensure no single server becomes overwhelmed, improving the reliability and availability of applications.
- Makes decisions based on IP addresses, TCP/UDP ports, or application-level content to optimize resource use, maximize throughput, minimize response times, and avoid overload of any single resource.
- Provides fault tolerance
- Configurable loads
- TCP offload
- SSL offload
- Caching
- Prioritization
    - QoS
- Content switching
    - Application-centric balancing.
### Proxy
- A proxy acts as an intermediary between a user device and the internet, receiving request from clients, forwarding them to the relevant server, and returning the server's response to the client.
- Can provide additional functionality such as content caching, access control, and filtering.
    - Enhances security and performance.
### Network-attached Storage (NAS)
- Dedicated file storage device connected to a network
    - Allows multiple users and client devices to retrieve and store data from a centralized location.
- Designed for easy file sharing, data backups, and centralized data management.
- Supports variety of protocols such as NFS, SMB/CIFS, and AFP.
- Offer scalable and cost-effective solutions.
- File-level access
    - Have to pull entire file across the network and write entire file back to NAS
- Requires a lot of bandwidth

### Storage area network (SAN)
- Dedicated, high-speed network that provides access to consolidated, block-level data storage.
    - Looks and feels like a local storage drive.
    - Can change just modified blocks of data.
- Designed to handle large volumes of data transfers, improving the availability and performance of applications by offloading storage functions and direct access to multiple storage devices.
- Often used in enterprise environments to enhance storage functions & data management.
- Very efficient reading & writing.
- Requires a lot of bandwidth.

### Wireless
#### Access Point (AP)
- Networking device that allows wireless device to connect to a wired network using Wi-fi or related standards.
- Operate at the data link layer, bridging the wireless and wired segments of a network.
    - Translates between 802.11 and ethernet.
- Extend wireless coverage of a network and can manage multiple connection.
- Use of multiple access points can extend a network across larger areas. (building, remote site, etc.)
    - Allow users to move across an area and still access network seamlessly.
    - Should feel invisible to user.
#### Wireless LAN Controller (WLC)
- Central management of  wireless access points in a network. 
    - "single pane of glass"
- Control a WAN
- Simplify deployment and management, including configuration, security policies, and managing guest access.

## Applications
### Content Delivery Network (CDN)
- Globally distributed network of proxy servers and data centers designed to deliver internet content rapidly to users.
- Content is cached in multiple locations around the world to reduce latency and improve access speed for users regardless of location.
    - User accesses data from the most local server.
- Invisible to end user.
## Functions
### Virtual Private Network (VPN)
-  Create a safe and encrypted connection over less secure networks.
- Used to establish secure connections between remote users or remote sites and an organization's private network.
    - Allowing for secure data transmission across public networks as if the devices were directly connected to the private network.
- VPN Concentrator/Head-end
    - Central hardware device
    - Encryption/decryption access device
    - often integrated into a firewall but sometimes a purpose build device.
- Different deployment options
    - Specialized cryptographic hardware
        - Supports high throughput
    - Software-based options.
### Quality of Service (QoS)
- Set of technologies and policies used to manage and prioritize network traffic to ensure the performance of critical applications and services.
    - Traffic and Packet shaping
- Assign different priorities to different types of traffic.
    - Ensure essential services like voice and video communication are give higher priority over less critical data.
    - Can control by applications as well.
- Control by bandwidth usage or data rates.
- Helps reduce latency, jitter, and packet  loss.
    - Improve overall experience in networks with limited bandwidth.
- Manage QoS with routers, switches, firewalls, or QoS devices.
### Time to Live (TTL)
- Field in the header of IP packets that specifies the maximum time/number of hops a packet is allowed to traverse network(s) before being discarded by a router.
- Prevent packets from looping indefinitely withing a network.
    - Each hop decreases TTL value until it reaches 0, at which point the packet is dropped.
- Default TTL 
    - macOS & Linux: 64 hops
    - Windows: 128 hops